Finger ECG Signal for User Authentication: Usability and Performance
Hugo Placido da Silva ´
IT - Inst. de Telecomunicac¸oes ˜
IST - Inst. Sup. Tecnico ´
Av. Rov. Pais, 1049, Lisboa
hsilva@lx.it.pt
Andre Lourenc¸o ´
IT - Inst. de Telecomunicac¸oes ˜
ISEL - Inst. Sup. Eng. de Lisboa
R. Co. Em´ıdio Nav., 1959, Lisboa
alourenco@deetc.isel.ipl.pt
Ana Fred
IT - Inst. de Telecomunicac¸oes ˜
Av. Rov. Pais, 1049, Lisboa
afred@lx.it.pt
Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University
3115 Eng. Bldg, MI 48824-1226
jain@cse.msu.edu
Abstract
Over the past few years, the evaluation of Electrocardiographic (ECG) signals as a prospective biometric modality
has revealed promising results. Given the vital and continuous nature of this information source, ECG signals offer
several advantages to the field of biometrics; yet, several
challenges currently prevent the ECG from being adopted
as a biometric modality in operational settings. These arise
partially due to ECG signal’s clinical tradition and intrusiveness, but also from the lack of evidence on the permanence of the ECG templates over time. The problem of intrusiveness has been recently overcome with the “off-theperson” approach for capturing ECG signals. In this paper
we provide an evaluation of the permanence of ECG signals collected at the fingers, with respect to the biometric
authentication performance. Our experimental results on a
small dataset suggest that further research is necessary to
account for and understand sources of variability found in
some subjects. Despite these limitations, ”off-the-person”
ECG appears to be a viable trait for multi-biometric or
standalone biometrics, low user throughput, real-world scenarios.
1. Introduction
The study of Electrocardiographic (ECG) signals as a
potential biometric trait can be traced back to the ground
breaking works by Biel et al. [2] and Kyoso & Uchiyama
[10]. Although many authors have continued to contribute
to the field [8, 16, 17, 24], a limiting aspect of this modality
has been the intrusiveness of the sensor device, which most
often requires a multi-lead placement at the chest and limbs
of the subject. The work on ECG biometrics has seen a new
dawn through the introduction of “off-the-person” sensing
[20], which makes the acceptability of the ECG comparable
to that found in more established modalities such as the iris,
palmprint, fingerprint, among others [11, 18].
In principle, the ECG is quite appealing for biometrics
[18]; in light of the seven factors defined in Jain et al. [9],
the ECG modality is admissible given that it can be found
in virtually all living humans (Universality), its authentication capabilities for circumscribed groups of individuals
has been shown (Uniqueness), it can be easily acquired using suitable devices (Measurability), it has been shown to
perform accurately for subsets of the population (Performance), the “off-the-person” approach has made it acceptable (Acceptability), and it’s not easily spoofed as it depends
on an internal body organ, the heart (Circumvention).
Furthermore, ECG signals provide intrinsic aliveness detection and are continuously available, which are also highly
desirable properties in biometrics. One of the open questions in ECG biometrics has been permanence, that is, the
temporal invariance of the templates with respect to the matching algorithms. In this paper, we present the first smallscale study on the permanence of ECG signals collected
under an “off-the-person” approach for biometric authentication, by comparing records collected at an interval of
several months.
The use of ECG signals as a biometric modality can be
quite useful in low security verification (1:1 matching). Also,
the sensing device presented in this paper is more natural to
the user, given that there is no need for an explicit interaction with the device. Our work provides two main specific
contributions for the field of ECG biometrics: a) Further
insight regarding the performance of “off-the-person” ECG
data; and b) Across session data matching.
Figure 1. Waveforms collected from each of the specialized cells
found in the heart, and their contribution to the prototypical heartbeat waveform (reprinted with permission from [13]).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides an introduction to key concepts within ECG biometrics; Section 3 describes the methodology adopted in
our study; Section 4 describes the tested matching approaches;
Section 5 summarizes the experimental results on real-world
data; and Sections 6 and 7 present the discussion and conclusions.
2. Background
The human heart is characterized by a complex bioelectrical system, at the core of which are a set of myogenic
cells whose main property is the periodic self-stimulation
capability, which ultimately generates the cardiac cycle and
rhythm. Today, both the heart cycle and rhythm are perfectly well-known concepts, extensively studied in the healthcare domain; the cycle is characterized by the typical heartbeat waveform (Figure 1), while the rhythm is commonly
known as the heart rate. We refer the reader to the book by
Malmivuo & Plonsey [13] for a detailed description of the
physiological, and electrical properties of the heart.
Throughout the years, several authors have argued about
the properties of the ECG as it pertains to biometric recognition [1, 14, 18]. This research has mostly focused on:
a) Recognition Methods; b) Template Extraction; c) and
Sensing Devices. Figure 2 shows an overlay of heartbeat
waveforms from two subjects, illustrating intra- and interclass diferences that can be found in the ECG.
In terms of Recognition Methods, authors have mostly
explored instance based learners [11, 16], neural networks
[3, 16], statistical pattern recognition [8], and information
theoretical approaches [6]; wavelets, support vector machines,
and adaptive filtering techniques can also be found [5, 12].
Figure 2. ECG heartbeat waveforms for two different users, illustrating the intra- and inter-class variability. In light gray we show
the individual heartbeat waveforms, the solid black line depicts the
mean of all heartbeat waveforms belonging to the subject, and the
dashed black lines highlight the standard deviation.
To date, benchmarking of ECG recognition methods has
been mostly based on single-session data from clinical sources
or public repositories (e.g. Physionet [7]) [2, 8, 24], or acquired using custom free-living protocols [1, 17].
Regarding Template Extraction, existing approaches can
be defined as fiducial, partially fiducial and non-fiducial.
Fiducial methods use latency, slope, angle and other measurements derived from anchor points within the signal (e.g.
P-QRS-T complexes), to create feature vectors that are used
as input to the recognizer [2, 8, 17]. Partially-fiducial methods typically only use the R-peak to perform heartbeat waveform segmentation, adopting either the full waveform or a
subset of it as input to the recognizer [11, 19, 24]. Nonfiducial methods extract information from the structure of
the signals, without the need for any reference points [4, 5,
6]; these methods are especially advantageous given that the
process of identifying fiducial points can be challenging.
Finally, several variations of the Sensor Devices can be
found. Most of the work has been focused on signals collected through “on-the-person” approaches, which include
multi- and single-lead clinical-grade ECG acquisition devices [2, 6, 8, 16, 17]. More recently, researchers have pivoted towards “off-the-person” approaches, enabling unobtrusive data acquisition at the hands and/or fingers [4, 11,
15, 19, 20, 26]. In this approach, methods have evolved
from a 3-electrode setup (positive, negative, and ground)
[11, 15, 26], to a 2-electrode setup [4, 19]. The former
has been used in short- [11, 15] and long-term performance
evaluation studies [26], while in the later, only short-term
validation has been performed [4, 20] (i.e. using data collected over a period of a few minutes or over the whole day).
The experimental evaluation reported for ECG biometric
recognition when using this non-standard electrode placement is mostly comprised of data collected in a single session, from which training and test data are extracted. Few
references are found in the literature to permanence studies, and no known previous studies have addressed the issue
of permanence in the context of the 2-electrode “off-theperson” approach’; this being the motivation for our work.
3. Methodology
3.1. Database
Following the recent trend towards the “off-the-person”
sensing approach, we focused our study on ECG data acquired at the fingers with dry Ag/AgCl electrodes, which is
closer to an ubiquitous and real-world deployment scenario.
Electrocardiographic (ECG) data acquisition was performed
using the custom, two lead differential sensor design with
virtual ground, found in Silva et al. [20]; for improved
comfort and greater efficiency, the ECG electrodes were fitted to a supporting base, with the intended finger placement
marked in an unequivocal way. Raw biosignals were acquired using a bioPLUX research Bluetooth wireless biosignal acquisition unit; this device was setup in a 12-bit resolution, 1kHz sampling frequency configuration.
A total of 63 subjects were enrolled in the experiment,
which involved two acquisition sessions separated by a 4-
month interval. The demographics of the subjects included
14 males and 49 females, with subject age ranging between
18 and 50 years (20.68 ± 2.83). None of the participants
reported any health problems, and all of them signed an informed consent form in order to participate in the experiment. In each of the sessions the subjects were asked to sit
for 2 minutes in a resting position, with two fingers, one
from the left and another from the right hand, placed on
each of the dry electrodes.
We highlight that the acquisition conditions and procedure were the same for all of the subjects, and for both sessions. Also, given the fact that a voltage potential differential is being measured, the signals measured at the fingers
have exactly the same morphology as the signals measured
at the hand palms due to the anatomical proximity of both
areas. Figure 3 illustrates the application of the acquisition
setup to the use case of interacting with a PC.
3.2. Pre-processing
The ECG signals are affected by multiple noise sources
such as motion artifacts, power line and/or electromyography interference. Figure 4 presents the pre-processing steps
followed by our approach for extracting the templates from
the raw ECG signal. We designed a digital zero-phase forward and reverse Butterworth band pass filter with 5−20Hz
cutoff frequencies, to limit the bandwidth of the raw data.
Note that while for clinical applications, a larger pass band
is required to preserve additional information1
, for biometric authentication applications we can optimize the filtering
taking into account the recognition accuracy.
For experimental analysis, we followed a partially-fiducial
approach, where the classifier is based on template matching, using the information content of the heartbeat waveforms, and as such, a compatible segmentation algorithm
was adopted, following the work described by Lourenc¸o et
al. [12]. This procedure determines the time instant of the
R-peak, and the heartbeat waveform is considered to be the
[−200; 400] milliseconds interval around that instant, for a
template size of 900 bytes.
Furthermore, in our study we considered that the templates can be computed based on 5 consecutive heartbeat
waveforms, that is, we perform a filtering step in the template space. Two different approaches were evaluated for
this step: a) the mean wave (x), which creates a smoothed
version of the template; and b) the median wave (x˜), which
is more robust to possible outliers.
3.3. Outlier Removal
Even after these pre-processing and feature extraction
steps, the signals collected at the fingers are much more
prone to noise than the regular ECG data obtained at the
chest. As such, we discard spurious heartbeats using an
outlier detection scheme based on the cosine distance to the
mean heartbeat waveform in each recording session. Let
X = {x1, ..., xn} denote the set of n individual heartbeat
waveforms obtained after pre-processing; x
min
i
and x
max
i
are the minimum and the maximum absolute values of each
individual heartbeat; the mean heartbeat waveform for a
session is given by µx =
1
N
Pn
1
xi
. Our outlier removal
step is performed as follows:
1. Compute the cosine distance, Dcos (xi
, µx), of each
individual heartbeat waveform xi ∈ X to µx;
2. Compute the 1
st and 2
nd order statistical moments of
the distances Dcos (xi
, µx): mean value, µDcos(xi,µx)
and standard deviation, σDcos(xi,µx)
;
3. Compute the median of x
min
i
and x
max
i
, denoted as
x˜min and x˜max, respectively;
4. Scan the set of heartbeat waveforms X for the conditions below, and if any is met for a given xi ∈ X, xi
is considered an outlier and discarded:
(a) x
max
i
does not correspond to the R-peak position (determined from the segmentation step);
(b) x
max
i > 1.5 · x˜max and x
min
i < 1.5 · x˜min;
1The recommended bandwidth proposed by the AHA and ANSI associations for diagnostics purpose is [0.05, 150] Hz
(a) Sensor pad applied to a keyboard (b) Interaction with the sensor pad, with the ECG shown on screen.
Figure 3. ECG sensor pad arrangement (left) and interaction with the sensor (right); the two light gray circular areas in Figure 3(a) are the
dry hand palm/finger pads.
Figure 4. ECG pre-processing and template extraction process. Raw data is acquired from the “off-the-person” sensor and then bandpass
filtered; the individual heartbeat waveforms are segmented by their R-peaks, and finally a template is produced as the mean or median of
consecutive individual heartbeat waveforms.
(c) Dcos (xi
, µx) > (µDcos(xi,µx)+0.5·σDcos(xi,µx)).
For performance evaluation we tested an instance-based
learning, template matching approach (through a k-NN classifier), and also a Support Vector Machine (SVM) approach,
as will be described next. The templates, xi
, are formed using individual heartbeat waveforms, acquired typically in
less than 1s (considering a heart rhythm of 60 bpm)
2
, and
obtained either by calculating their mean x, or median x˜.
4. Matching
We call a given dataset used for enrollment the training
set Dtrain. Considering x
(wj )
i
to be the i
th instance of the
m available training templates for subject wj (x
(wj )
i
being
2The typical heart rate ranges from 60-100 bpm
the mean or median of 5 consecutive heartbeat waveforms),
Dtrain is defined as:
Dtrain = {x
(wj )
i ∈ R
p
, wj ∈ 1, · · · , #W , i ∈ 1, · · · , m},
(1)
where W is the set of class labels or users.
4.1. Instance-based Learning
For the template matching approach, given an unknown
template, xu, an estimated class prediction, wˆu, is obtained
by determining the most represented class or grouping wj
among the neighborhood of the k nearest patterns from the
data set Dtrain (k-NN classifier), according to a distance
metric, D(xu, xj ), ∀xj ∈ Dtrain. We compared the classical Euclidean distance, Deucl, with the Cosine distance,
Dcos, defined as:
Deucl 
xu, x
(wl)
j

=
vuutXp
k=1
(xu[k] − x
(wl)
j
[k])2, (2)
Dcos 
xu, x
(wl)
j

= 1 −
Pp
k=1 xu[k]x
(wl)
j
[k]
qPp
k=1 xu[k]
2 Pp
k=1 x
(wl)
j
[k]
2
.
(3)
A distance matrix was computed, describing distances
between each instance from the test set and each of the
training templates in Dtrain. For experimental purposes,
a 3-NN classifier was used, in which the class wˆu of a given
unknown template, xu, is defined as the most represented
class among the 3 nearest templates of the training set with
the lowest distance D(,) to xu:
wˆu = arg max
u=1,··· ,#W
X
k
i=1
V ote 
xu, x
(wu)
i

(4)
where each vote assigned to xu, corresponds to the label
obtained from the closest training templates.
For authentication, the number of falsely accepted and
falsely rejected patterns is determined, verifying if the majority of the neighbors has a distance smaller than a predefined threshold.
4.2. Support Vector Machines
Consider the binary classification setup with training set
DSV M, composed of l instances, to be a subset of the complete training set Dtrain, comprising only the training samples of two classes, here denoted as w = −1 or w = 1:
DSV M = {(xi
, wxi
)|xi ∈ R
p
, wxi ∈ −1, 1}
n
i=1. (5)
Support Vector Machines (SVM) find the separating hyperplane (v · x = b), maximizing the margin. In order to
deal with the case where the hyperplane splitting introduces
misclassifications, the concept of “soft” margin is used. The
method introduces slack variables, ξi
, which measure the
degree of misclassification of sample xi
, weighted by the
parameter C, leading to the following primal formulation:
min
w,ξ,b
1
2
||v||2 + C
Xn
i=1
ξi (6)
s.t. wxi
(v · x − b) ≥ 1 − ξi
. (7)
The learning process is assumed to be performed offline.
Once the model is estimated (v and b), the class prediction,
wxu
, for an unknown object, xu, is determined by
wxu = sgn(v · x + b). (8)
Table 1. EER (%) for the “dove-like” population across T1 − T2
when using the 3−NN classifier with the Dcos distance metric and
the mean waves x as template.
D(,) Dcos Deucl
T x˜ x x˜ x
Session T1-T2 4.7 4.5 5.2 5.3
# Subjects 42 37 34 32
In our approach we built N − 1 models for each individual, each model enabling the comparison of individual j
with another of the N − 1 remaining models. As an example, the model fjk, trained for individuals j and k,
fjk(xu) : xu ∈ R
p → wxjk ∈ j, k, (9)
estimates a decision over instance x, classifying it as individual j or k. In authentication, we test all the N − 1
trained models, fj·
, where j is the class of the claimed identity, and accept it as genuine only when all the models positively classify the testing instance.
5. Experimental Results
We evaluated the permanence of the ECG templates using two independent sets of heartbeat waveforms acquired
according to the methodology described in Section 3; we
refer to the first and second acquisition sessions as T1 and
T2, respectively. The T1 − T2 & T2 − T1 tests were conducted over the entire database, using T1 for training and
T2 for test (and vice versa), while the tests for the T1 − T1
and T2 − T2 consider Dtrain to have 30% of the templates
available within a given session.
In [25] Yanger and Dunstone introduced the concept of
zooplot, a tool that helps in the analysis of different biometric traits, allowing the categorization of different types
of users based on their separability. Figure 5 presents the
zooplot obtained using the 3-NN classifier with Dcos as the
metric and x as the template, where each point represents a
single subject.
A majority of the population (59%, or 37 users) has a
“dove-like” behavior, while the remaining subjects are mainly
distributed through the “chameleon-like” category. In our
case, this last group is composed of users for which the
heartbeat waveform changed significantly between T1 and
T2, this change being due to: a) different heart rates between both recording sessions; and b) drastic morphological
changes that require clinical validation.
Table 1 summarizes the Equal Error Rate (EER) for the
“dove-like” subjects using the template matching approach.
The best performance was achieved by using Dcos, with x
as the templates, where the EER = 4.5%. Figure 6 represents the distribution of genuine and impostors distances by
Figure 5. Zooplot [25]. The x axis represents the Genunine Performance, and the y axis the Impostor Performance, when using
the 3−NN classifier with the Dcos distance metric and the mean
waves x as template.
Figure 6. Empirical distance distribution when using the 3−NN
classifier with the Dcos distance metric and the mean waves x as
the template for between-session matching (T1 − T2). The genuine distribution is shown in green, while the impostor distribution
is shown in red.
using the 3−NN classifier with Dcos as distance metric and
x as templates. The overlap of the genuine and imposter
curves in this situation is small, showing that for the “dovelike” population the separability is apparent, even when using data from multiple sessions (T1 − T2). In Table 2, we
present the results for the entire population, showing the
performance within-session (T1 − T1 and T2 − T2), and
for T1 − T2 & T2 − T1. The ROC curves for the best case
classifier configuration, in which the median wave is used
as the template and SVM classifier is used, are presented in
Figure 7.
Figure 7. ROC curves for the entire population (63 subjects; T1 −
T2) using SVMs with the median wave as template.
6. Discussion
The performance across recording sessions (T1 − T2 &
T2−T1) revealed that the heartbeat waveform changed significantly for several subjects. Figure 8 shows an example
of two subjects, where a large variation in the templates was
found; the black and dashed lines correspond, respectively,
to the mean wave and standard deviation (excluding the outliers). The first example shows a template morphing due to
different heart rates in T1 and T2. The P and the T complexes are affected by the heart rate, and as one can observe,
their latencies can really change. The second case shows an
example of a heartbeat waveform shape shift between T1
and T2, where the R and S complexes changed their morphology significantly.
Our methodology depends on the segmentation and alignment of the heartbeats, and heart rate changes will bias the
alignment between heartbeat waveforms, since several complexes change their latencies. In the literature there are several approaches focusing on extraction of features that are
invariant to the heart rate, or that try to normalize heartbeats
[21, 22, 23], which is also the topic of ongoing work in our
group. In this paper, we focused on the use of latency and
amplitude features, in which the template morphing is directly expressed. Regarding the classifier, we adopted template matching and SVMs, which, as shown by the preliminary results given in this work, are quite sensitive to morphological changes in the templates.
Possible mitigation procedures for the morphing effects
detected in our study may involve the use of feature spaces
Table 2. EER (µ±σ%) for the entire population (63 subjects) for the cases where the train and test sets belong to the same session (T1−T1
and T2 − T2) and to different sessions (T1 − T2 & T2 − T1).
D(,) Dcos Deucl SV M
T x˜ x x˜ x x˜ x
Session
T1-T1 3.00 ± 0.19 2.63 ± 0.13 2.87 ± 0.17 2.99 ± 0.18 1.07 ± 0.23 0.99 ± 0.20
T2-T2 4.49 ± 0.13 4.53 ± 0.18 3.32 ± 0.14 3.38 ± 0.18 1.92 ± 0.13 2.01 ± 0.17
T1-T2 13.26 13.31 11.79 12.16 9.10 9.47
T2-T1 13.00 13.30 14.40 14.15 9.68 9.37
(a) Template morphing due to different heart rates in T1 and T2
(b) Heartbeat waveform shape shift between to T1 and T2
Figure 8. Examples of two non-dove-like cases, where a different
heart rate between recording sessions leads to different waveform
morphologies (a), and a shape shifting occurs due to reasons that
require clinical validation (b).
based on spectral components of the heartbeat waveform.
Another mitigation procedure is the periodic update and/or
increase of the knowledge base and enrollment data, so that
the system can have templates that are representative of different states that the subject typically undergoes through.
Furthermore, we believe that additional work can be done at
the sensor level targeting ECG multibiometrics to improve
permanence across time, by increasing the analog-to-digital
conversion resolution, and/or by increasing the sampling
rate.
7. Conclusions
Research on Electrocardiographic (ECG) signals has advanced a long way from it’s clinical roots, to novel application domains in areas so diverse as biometric recognition. Given the intrinsic properties of the ECG, it can be
particularly useful for low security verification (1:1 matching), especially given that the sensor device does not require an explicit interaction procedure, and is more natural
to the user, as the “off-the-person” approach followed in this
work. The short-term performance of ECG signals has been
extensively demonstrated in the literature, which is already
very promising in a multibiometrics context. If combined
with other modalities, there are several scenarios where the
ECG modality can serve as an important add-on.
For example, in multibiometrics applications, a periodic
recognition with a hard biometrics (e.g. fingerprint) could
be required, which would then be continuously confirmed
by the ECG (considering that ECG data would be collected
simultaneously with the fingerprint template). We refer the
reader to the work by Silva et al. [18] for a discussion of the
potential outreach and role of the ECG in biometrics.
However, the field is severely lacking studies that demonstrate the permanence of ECG biometric templates, which
would greatly increase the added-value and applicability of
this new modality. As such, in this paper we have performed
a preliminary study based on data collected in two separate
time instants. Experimental results have shown the ECG to
be reasonably different across individuals, even when training the recognition system with data collected at a first time
instant to classify the data collected several months later.
Our work has shown that the ECG exhibits promising
recognition rates for biometric authentication both in shortterm (minutes apart) and long-term data (months apart). With
respect to the taxonomy in [25], within the “dove-like” population we obtained matching rates for authentication with
Equal Error Rates (EER) of 4.5%. Regarding the performance for the entire population, the best results for longterm data were achieved using a SVM classifier, with which
an EER of 9.1% was obtained. Our main contributions are:
a) Further insight regarding the performance of “off-theperson” ECG data;
b) Recognition results for data collected with several months
apart are presented.
Future work will focus on the characterization of sources
of variability such as heart rate and morphological shape
shifts in the templates. Our results, together with the latest
advances in recognition methods, template extraction, and
sensor devices, can reinforce that ECG is a viable trait for
multibiometric or standalone biometrics, low user throughput, real-world scenarios.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by Fundac¸ao para a Ci- ˜
encia e Tecnologia (FCT) under the grants PTDC/EEI-SII/ ˆ
2312/2012, SFRH/BD/65248/2009 and SFRH/PROTEC/4
9512/2009, whose support the authors gratefully acknowledge. The team would also like to thank the following individuals for their invaluable support to this work: Carlos Carreiras and Filipe Canento from the IT - Instituto de
Telecomunicac¸oes, and Prof. Marta Aires de Sousa, Prof. ˜
Nuno Raposo, Joana Santos, and Ana Taborda from the
Health School of the Portuguese Red Cross.
References
[1] F. Agrafioti, J. Gao, and D. Hatzinakos. Biometrics, chapter
Heart Biometrics: Theory, Methods and Applications, Biometrics. InTech, 2011.
[2] L. Biel, O. Petterson, L. Phillipson, and P. Wide. ECG analysis: A new approach in human identification. IEEE Trans.
on Instrumentation and Measurement, 50(3):808–812, 2001.
[3] O. Boumbarov, Y. Velchev, and S. Sokolov. ECG personal identification in subspaces using radial basis neural
networks. In IEEE Int’l Workshop on Intel. Data Acq. and
Adv. Computing Systems, pages 446 –451, 2009.
[4] A. Chan, M. Hamdy, A. Badre, and V. Badee. Wavelet distance measure for person identification using electrocardiograms. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., 57(2):248–253, 2008.
[5] C.-C. Chiu, C.-M. Chuang, and C.-Y. Hsu. A novel personal
identity verification approach using a discrete wavelet transform of the ECG signal. In Proc. of the Int’l Conf. on Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering, pages 201–206, 2008.
[6] D. Coutinho, A. Fred, and M. Figueiredo. One-lead ECGbased personal identification using Ziv-Merhav cross parsing. In Proc. of the 20th Int’l Conf. on Pattern Rec., 2010.
[7] A. L. Goldberger, L. Amaral, L. Glass, J. Hausdorff,
P. Ivanov, R. Mark, J. Mietus, G. Moody, C. Peng, and
H. Stanley. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. Circulation, 101(23):215–220, 2000.
[8] S. Israel, J. Irvine, A. Cheng, M. Wiederhold, and B. Wiederhold. ECG to identify individuals. Pattern Recognition,
38(1):133–142, 2005.
[9] A. K. Jain, R. M. Bolle, and S. Pankanti. Biometrics: Personal Identification in Networked Society. Springer, 2005.
[10] M. Kyoso and A. Uchiyama. Development of an ECG identification system. In Proc. of the 23rd Int’l Conf. of the IEEE
EMBS, volume 4, pages 3721 – 3723, 2001.
[11] A. Lourenc¸o, H. Silva, and A. Fred. Unveiling the biometric potential of Finger-Based ECG signals. Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2011.
[12] A. Lourenc¸o, H. Silva, and A. Fred. ECG-based biometrics:
A real time classification approach. In Proc. 22nd IEEE Int’l
Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Proc., 2012.
[13] J. Malmivuo and R. Plonsey. Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and Applications of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields.
Oxford University Press, USA, 1st edition, 1995.
[14] I. Odinaka, P.-H. Lai, A. Kaplan, J. O’Sullivan, E. Sirevaag,
and J. Rohrbaugh. ECG biometric recognition: A comparative analysis. IEEE Trans. on Inf. Forensics and Security,
7(6):1812 –1824, Dec. 2012.
[15] T. W. Shen, W. Tompkins, and Y. H. Hu. Implementation
of a one-lead ECG human identification system on a normal
population. J. Eng. Computer Innovations, 2:12–21, 2011.
[16] T. W. Shen, W. J. Tompkins, and Y. H. Hu. One-lead ECG for
identity verification. Proc. of the 24th Conf. and the Annual
Fall Meeting of the IEEE EMBS, 1:62–63, 2002.
[17] H. Silva, H. Gamboa, and A. Fred. Applicability of lead v2
ECG measurements in biometrics. In Proc. of the Med-e-Tel
Forum, pages 177–180, Apr. 2007.
[18] H. Silva, A. Lourenc¸o, F. Canento, A. Fred, and N. Raposo.
ECG biometrics: Principles and applications. In Proc. of the
6th BIOSIGNALS Conf., 2013.
[19] H. Silva, A. Lourenc¸o, A. Fred, and J. Filipe. Clinical data
privacy and customization via biometrics based on ECG signals. In Proc. 7th USAB Conf., USAB, 2011.
[20] H. Silva, A. Lourenc¸o, R. Lourenc¸o, P. Leite, D. Coutinho,
and A. Fred. Study and evaluation of a single differential
sensor design based on electro-textile electrodes for ECG
biometrics applications. In Proc. IEEE Sensors Conf., 2011.
[21] Y. Singh, , and S. Singh. Evaluation of electrocardiogram for
biometric authentication. J. of Inf. Sec., 3(1):39–48, 2012.
[22] Y. Singh and P. Gupta. ECG to individual identification. In
Proc. of the 2nd IEEE BTAS Conf., pages 1–8, 2008.
[23] M. Tawfik, H. Selim, and T. Kamal. Human identification
using time normalized QT signal and the QRS complex of
the ECG. In Proc. of the 7th Int. Symp. on Comm. Systems,
Networks and Digital Signal Proc., pages 755–759, 2010.
[24] Y. Wang, F. Agrafioti, D. Hatzinakos, and K. N. Plataniotis.
Analysis of human electrocardiogram for biometric recognition. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process, page 19, 2008.
[25] N. Yager and T. Dunstone. The biometric menagerie. IEEE
Trans. on Pat. Anal. and Machine Intell., 32:220–230, 2010.
[26] C. Zhao, T. Wysocki, F. Agrafioti, and D. Hatzinakos. Securing handheld devices and fingerprint readers with ECG
biometrics. In Proc. of the 5th IEEE BTAS Conf., pages 150
–155, 2012.
